restructure (#22137)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/preview/architecture/system-catalog.md

\d+ <table-name>
```

## Information schema

In most cases, developers and applications interact with _information_schema_ for querying database metadata in a portable manner, while pg_catalog is primarily used for advanced PostgreSQL administration and troubleshooting tasks.

_information_schema_ provides a standardized, SQL-compliant view of database metadata that is portable across different database systems and is defined in the [SQL standard](https://www.iso.org/standard/76586.html), while pg_catalog offers detailed, PostgreSQL-specific system catalogs for internal database operations and management.

> Let us look at some of the important information that can be fetched using the system catalog tables and views followed by a summary of other members.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's look at some of the important information that can be fetched using the system catalog tables and views, followed by a summary of other members.
```

## Schema

The schema details of the various database objects are stored in multiple tables as follows.

- _pg_database_ : stores the list of all the databases in the system
- _pg_namespace_ : stores metadata about schemas, including schema names, owner information, and associated privileges.
- _pg_class_ : stores metadata about all relations (tables, views, indexes, sequences, and other relation types) in the database.
- _pg_attribute_ : stores information about the columns (attributes) of all relations (tables, views, indexes, and so on) in the database.
- _pg_index_ : stores detailed metadata about indexes, including details such as the indexed columns, index types, and index properties like uniqueness and inclusion of nullable values.
- _pg_constraint_ : stores information about constraints on tables. These can include unique constraints, check constraints, primary key constraints, and foreign key constraints.

> This information is typically fetched using convenient views like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This information is typically fetched using convenient views, such as the following:
```

> - _pg_views_ : provides details on views and their definitions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- _pg_views_ : provides details on views and their definitions.
```

> - _pg_tables_ : provides details on tables, their ownership and basic properties (eg, if the table has any indexes etc)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- _pg_tables_ : provides details on tables, their ownership, and basic properties (for example, if the table has any indexes)
```

- `information_schema.tables` : provides table information as per SQL standard.
- `information_schema.columns` : provides column information as per SQL standard.

> - `information_schema.columns` : provides view information as per SQL standard.

Reviewer: information_schema.views?

Reviewer: @premkumr Did you miss this comment - is this correct? Why repeat columns?

Author: Yup. looks like I missed this comment :( . Will raise a PR soon ...

{{</tip>}}

## Table activity

The _pg_stat_all_tables_ and _pg_stat_user_tables_ views provide insights into various table-level metrics, including the number of rows inserted, updated, deleted, and accessed via sequential or index scans. It enables administrators to assess table-level activity, identify high-traffic tables, and optimize database performance based on usage patterns.

## Locks

The _pg_locks_ view provides detailed information about current locks held by active transactions, including lock types (for example, shared, exclusive), lock modes, and the associated database objects being locked. This view can be used to monitor lock escalation, detect long-running transactions holding locks, and optimize transactions to minimize lock contention and improve database concurrency.

{{<note>}}
The pg_locks view doesn't have a documented view definition that you can directly inspect in the database. This is because the view definition relies on internal data structures used by the lock manager, and these structures aren't intended for direct user access.
{{</note>}}

{{<tip>}}

> [pg_locks](#pg-locks) view can be joined to [pg_stat_activity](#pg-stat-activity) view on the _pid_ column to get more information on the session holding or awaiting each lock. To learn more about how the pg_locks can be used to get insights on transaction locks, see [Lock insights](../../explore/observability/pg-locks).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[pg_locks](#pg-locks) view can be joined to [pg_stat_activity](#pg-stat-activity) view on the _pid_ column to get more information on the session holding or awaiting each lock. To learn more about how pg_locks can be used to get insights on transaction locks, see [Lock insights](../../explore/observability/pg-locks).
```

{{</tip>}}

## Stored procedures

> The _pg_proc_ catalog stores metadata about database procedures, including their names, argument types, return types, source code, and associated permissions. It enables developers and administrators can inspect function definitions, review function dependencies, and monitor usage statistics to optimize query performance and database operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The _pg_proc_ catalog stores metadata about database procedures, including their names, argument types, return types, source code, and associated permissions. It enables developers and administrators to inspect function definitions, review function dependencies, and monitor usage statistics to optimize query performance and database operations.
```

> - _pg_stat_user_functions_ : provides stats on execution details on stored procedures (e.g. no.of calls, execution time spent)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- _pg_stat_user_functions_ : provides statistics on execution details on stored procedures (for example, number of calls, execution time spent)
```

> To understand how to improve query performance using these stats, see [Query tuning](../../explore/query-1-performance/pg-stat-statements/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To understand how to improve query performance using these stats, see [Query tuning](../../explore/query-1-performance/pg-stat-statements/).
```

{{</tip>}}

## Data statistics

> The statistics about the table data are stored in the _pg_statistics_ table. For efficiency, this data is not updated on the fly so it may not be up to date. This data can be updated by running the `ANALYZE` command. This table stores column-level information about the number of distinct values, most common values, their frequencies etc. This data is very useful for query tuning. The _pg_stats_ view provides user-friendly information by joining other tables with the _pg_statistic_ table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The statistics about the table data are stored in the _pg_statistics_ table. For efficiency, this data is not updated on the fly so it may not be up to date. This data can be updated by running the `ANALYZE` command. This table stores column-level information about the number of distinct values, most common values, their frequencies, and so on. This data is very useful for query tuning. The _pg_stats_ view provides user-friendly information by joining other tables with the _pg_statistic_ table.
```

## Users and roles

> The `pg_authid` table stores details of users, roles, groups and the corresponding privileges like if the user is a superuser, if the user can create a database etc. The membership of users to groups and roles is stored in the `pg_auth_members` table. This information is usually queried using the following views.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `pg_authid` table stores details of users, roles, groups, and the corresponding privileges like if the user is a superuser, if the user can create a database, and so on. The membership of users to groups and roles is stored in the `pg_auth_members` table. This information is usually queried using the following views:
```

> - _pg_roles_: stores metadata about database roles, including role names, privileges, membership, and login capabilities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- _pg_roles_: stores metadata about database roles, including role names, privileges, membership, and login capabilities.
```

> - _pg_user_: Information specific to database users - user name, password and privileges

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- _pg_user_: Information specific to database users, including user name, password, and privileges
```
